#### **2.8.3 Value Set Conversion** 

An implementation of the Java Virtual Machine that supports an extended floating- point value set is permitted or required, under specified circumstances, to map a value of the associated floating-point type between the extended and the standard value sets. Such a *value set conversion* is not a type conversion, but a mapping between the value sets associated with the same type. 

Where value set conversion is indicated, an implementation is permitted to perform one of the following operations on a value: 

- If the value is of type float and is not an element of the float value set,it maps the value to the nearest element of the float value set. 

- If the value is of type double and is not an element of the double value set, it maps the value to the nearest element of the double value set. 

  In addition, where value set conversion is indicated, certain operations are required: 

- Suppose execution of a Java Virtual Machine instruction that is not FP-strict causes a value of type float to be pushed onto an operand stack that is FP-strict, passed as a parameter, or stored into a local variable, a field, or an element of an array. If the value is not an element of the float value set, it maps the value to the nearest element of the float value set. 
- Suppose execution of a Java Virtual Machine instruction that is not FP-strict causes a value of type double to be pushed onto an operand stack that is FP- strict, passed as a parameter, or stored into a local variable, a field, or an element of an array. If the value is not an element of the double value set, it maps the value to the nearest element of the double value set. 

1. Such required value set conversions may occur as a result of passing a parameter of a floating-point type during method invocation, including native method invocation; returning a value of a floating-point type from a method that is not FP- strict to a method that is FP-strict; or storing a value of a floating-point type into a local variable, a field, or an array in a method that is not FP-strict. 

   Not all values from an extended-exponent value set can be mapped exactly to a value in the corresponding standard value set. If a value being mapped is too large to be represented exactly (its exponent is greater than that permitted by the standard value set), it is converted to a (positive or negative) infinity of the corresponding type. If a value being mapped is too small to be represented exactly (its exponent is smaller than that permitted by the standard value set), it is rounded to the nearest of a representable denormalized value or zero of the same sign. 

   Value set conversion preserves infinities and NaNs and cannot change the sign of the value being converted. Value set conversion has no effect on a value that is not of a floating-point type. 