#### 3.1 Format of Examples

This chapter consists mainly of examples of source code together with annotated listings of the Java Virtual Machine code that the javac compiler in Oracle’s JDK release 1.0.2 generates for the examples. The Java Virtual Machine code is written in the informal “virtual machine assembly language” output by Oracle's javap utility, distributed with the JDK release. You can use javap to generate additional examples of compiled methods.

The format of the examples should be familiar to anyone who has read assembly code. Each instruction takes the form:

``` 
    <index> <opcode> [ <operand1> [ <operand2>... ]] [<comment>]
```

The <index> is the index of the opcode of the instruction in the array that contains the bytes of Java Virtual Machine code for this method. Alternatively, the <index> may be thought of as a byte offset from the beginning of the method. The <opcode> is the mnemonic for the instruction's opcode, and the zero or more <operandN> are the operands of the instruction. The optional <comment> is given in end-of-line comment syntax:

```
		8 bipush 100 // Push int constant 100
```

Some of the material in the comments is emitted by javap; the rest is supplied by the authors. The <index> prefacing each instruction may be used as the target of a control transfer instruction. For instance, a goto 8 instruction transfers control to the instruction at index 8. Note that the actual operands of Java Virtual Machine control transfer instructions are offsets from the addresses of the opcodes of those instructions; these operands are displayed by javap (and are shown in this chapter) as more easily read offsets into their methods.

We preface an operand representing a run-time constant pool index with a hash sign and follow the instruction by a comment identifying the run-time constant pool item referenced, as in:

``` 
    10 ldc #1 // Push float constant 100.0
```

or:

``` 
    9 invokevirtual #4 // Method Example.addTwo(II)I
```

For the purposes of this chapter, we do not worry about specifying details such as
operand sizes.