**2.11.8 Method Invocation and Return Instructions** 

The following five instructions invoke methods: 

- *invokevirtual* invokes an instance method of an object, dispatching on the (virtual) type of the object. This is the normal method dispatch in the Java programming language. 

- *invokeinterface* invokes an interface method, searching the methods implemented by the particular run-time object to find the appropriate method. 

- *invokespecial*invokesaninstancemethodrequiringspecialhandling,whetheran instance initialization method (ยง2.9), a private method, or a superclass method. 

- *invokestatic* invokes a class (static) method in a named class. 

- *invokedynamic* invokes the method which is the target of the call site object bound to the *invokedynamic* instruction. The call site object was bound to a specific lexical occurrence of the *invokedynamic* instruction by the Java Virtual Machine as a result of running a bootstrap method before the first execution of the instruction. Therefore, each occurrence of an *invokedynamic* instruction has a unique linkage state, unlike the other instructions which invoke methods. 

  The method return instructions, which are distinguished by return type, are *ireturn* (used to return values of type boolean, byte, char, short, or int), *lreturn*, *freturn*, *dreturn*, and *areturn*. In addition, the *return* instruction is used to return from methods declared to be void, instance initialization methods, and class or interface initialization methods. 