#### **2.11.7 Control Transfer Instructions** 

The control transfer instructions conditionally or unconditionally cause the Java Virtual Machine to continue execution with an instruction other than the one following the control transfer instruction. They are: 

- Conditional branch: *ifeq*, *ifne*, *iflt*, *ifle*, *ifgt*, *ifge*, *ifnull*, *ifnonnull*, *if_icmpeq*, *if_icmpne*, *if_icmplt*, *if_icmple*, *if_icmpgt if_icmpge*, *if_acmpeq*, *if_acmpne*. 
- Compound conditional branch: *tableswitch*, *lookupswitch*. 
- Unconditional branch: *goto*, *goto_w*, *jsr*, *jsr_w*, *ret*. 

The Java Virtual Machine has distinct sets of instructions that conditionally branch on comparison with data of int and reference types. It also has distinct conditional branch instructions that test for the null reference and thus it is not required to specify a concrete value for null (ยง2.4). 

Conditional branches on comparisons between data of types boolean, byte, char, and short are performed using int comparison instructions (ยง2.11.1). A conditional branch on a comparison between data of types long, float, or double is initiated using an instruction that compares the data and produces an int result of the comparison (ยง2.11.3). A subsequent int comparison instruction tests this result and effects the conditional branch. Because of its emphasis on int comparisons, the Java Virtual Machine provides a rich complement of conditional branch instructions for type int. 

All int conditional control transfer instructions perform signed comparisons. 