#### 2.2 Data Types

Like the Java programming language, the Java Virtual Machine operates on two kinds of types: primitive types and reference 
types. There are, correspondingly, two kinds of values that can be stored in variables, passed as arguments, returned by 
methods, and operated upon: primitive values and reference values.

The Java Virtual Machine expects that nearly all type checking is done prior to run time, typically by a compiler, and 
does not have to be done by the Java Virtual Machine itself. Values of primitive types need not be tagged or otherwise 
be inspectable to determine their types at run time, or to be distinguished from values of reference types. Instead, the 
instruction set of the Java Virtual Machine distinguishes its operand types using instructions intended to operate on 
values of specific types. For instance, iadd, ladd, fadd, and dadd are all Java Virtual Machine instructions that add 
two numeric values and produce numeric results, but each is specialized for its operand type: int, long, float, and 
double, respectively. For a summary of type support in the Java Virtual Machine instruction set, see ยง2.11.1.

The Java Virtual Machine contains explicit support for objects. An object is either a dynamically allocated class instance 
or an array. A reference to an object is considered to have Java Virtual Machine type reference. Values of type reference 
can be thought of as pointers to objects. More than one reference to an object may exist. Objects are always operated on, 
passed, and tested via values of type reference.
