#### 2.3 Primitive Types and Values

The primitive data types supported by the Java Virtual Machine are the numeric types, the boolean type (§2.3.4), and the returnAddress type (§2.3.3).

The numeric types consist of the integral types (§2.3.1) and the floating-point types (§2.3.2).

The integral types are:
- byte, whose values are 8-bit signed two's-complement integers, and whose default value is zero
- short, whose values are 16-bit signed two's-complement integers, and whose default value is zero
- int, whose values are 32-bit signed two's-complement integers, and whose default value is zero
- long, whose values are 64-bit signed two's-complement integers, and whose default value is zero
- char, whose values are 16-bit unsigned integers representing Unicode code points in the Basic Multilingual Plane, encoded with UTF-16, and whose default value is the null code point ('\u0000')

The floating-point types are:
- float, whose values are elements of the float value set or, where supported, the float-extended-exponent value set, and whose default value is positive zero
- double, whose values are elements of the double value set or, where supported, the double-extended-exponent value set, and whose default value is positive zero

The values of the boolean type encode the truth values true and false, and the default value is false.

    The First Edition of The Java® Virtual Machine Specification did not consider boolean to be a Java Virtual Machine type. However, boolean values do have limited support in the Java Virtual Machine. The Second Edition of The Java® Virtual Machine Specification clarified the issue by treating boolean as a type.

The values of the returnAddress type are pointers to the opcodes of Java Virtual Machine instructions. Of the primitive types, only the returnAddress type is not directly associated with a Java programming language type.