#### **2.6.2 Operand Stacks** 

Each frame (§2.6) contains a last-in-first-out (LIFO) stack known as its *operand stack*. The maximum depth of the operand stack of a frame is determined at compile-time and is supplied along with the code for the method associated with the frame (§4.7.3). 

Where it is clear by context, we will sometimes refer to the operand stack of the current frame as simply the operand stack. 

The operand stack is empty when the frame that contains it is created. The Java Virtual Machine supplies instructions to load constants or values from local variables or fields onto the operand stack. Other Java Virtual Machine instructions take operands from the operand stack, operate on them, and push the result back onto the operand stack. The operand stack is also used to prepare parameters to be passed to methods and to receive method results. 

For example, the *iadd* instruction (§*iadd*) adds two int values together. It requires that the int values to be added be the top two values of the operand stack, pushed there by previous instructions. Both of the int values are popped from the operand stack. They are added, and their sum is pushed back onto the operand stack. Subcomputations may be nested on the operand stack, resulting in values that can be used by the encompassing computation. 

Each entry on the operand stack can hold a value of any Java Virtual Machine type, including a value of type long or type double. 

Values from the operand stack must be operated upon in ways appropriate to their types. It is not possible, for example, to push two int values and subsequently treat them as a long or to push two float values and subsequently add them with an *iadd* instruction. A small number of Java Virtual Machine instructions (the *dup* instructions (§*dup*) and *swap* (§*swap*)) operate on run-time data areas as raw values without regard to their specific types; these instructions are defined in such a way that they cannot be used to modify or break up individual values. These restrictions on operand stack manipulation are enforced through class file verification (§4.10). 

At any point in time, an operand stack has an associated depth, where a value of type long or double contributes two units to the depth and a value of any other type contributes one unit. 