#### **2.8.1 Java Virtual Machine Floating-Point Arithmetic and IEEE 754** 

The key differences between the floating-point arithmetic supported by the Java Virtual Machine and the IEEE 754 standard are: 

- The floating-point operations of the Java Virtual Machine do not throw exceptions, trap, or otherwise signal the IEEE 754 exceptional conditions of invalid operation, division by zero, overflow, underflow, or inexact. The Java Virtual Machine has no signaling NaN value. 
- The Java Virtual Machine does not support IEEE 754 signaling floating-point comparisons. 
- The rounding operations of the Java Virtual Machine always use IEEE 754 round to nearest mode. Inexact results are rounded to the nearest representable value, with ties going to the value with a zero least-significant bit. This is the IEEE 754 default mode. But Java Virtual Machine instructions that convert values of floating-point types to values of integral types round toward zero. The Java Virtual Machine does not give any means to change the floating-point rounding mode. 
- The Java Virtual Machine does not support either the IEEE 754 single extended or double extended format, except insofar as the double and double-extended- exponent value sets may be said to support the single extended format. The float-extended-exponent and double-extended-exponent value sets, which may optionally be supported, do not correspond to the values of the IEEE 754 extended formats: the IEEE 754 extended formats require extended precision as well as extended exponent range. 



