**2.11.10 Synchronization** 

The Java Virtual Machine supports synchronization of both methods and sequences of instructions within a method by a single synchronization construct: the *monitor*. 

Method-level synchronization is performed implicitly, as part of method invocation and return (ยง2.11.8). A synchronized method is distinguished in the run-time constant pool's method_info structure (ยง4.6) by the ACC_SYNCHRONIZED flag, which is checked by the method invocation instructions. When invoking a method for which ACC_SYNCHRONIZED is set, the executing thread enters a monitor, invokes the method itself, and exits the monitor whether the method invocation completes normally or abruptly. During the time the executing thread owns the monitor, no other thread may enter it. If an exception is thrown during invocation of the synchronized method and the synchronized method does not handle the exception, the monitor for the method is automatically exited before the exception is rethrown out of the synchronized method. 

Synchronization of sequences of instructions is typically used to encode the synchronized block of the Java programming language. The Java Virtual Machine supplies the *monitorenter* and *monitorexit* instructions to support such language constructs. Proper implementation of synchronized blocks requires cooperation from a compiler targeting the Java Virtual Machine (ยง3.14). 

*Structured locking* is the situation when, during a method invocation, every exit on a given monitor matches a preceding entry on that monitor. Since there is no assurance that all code submitted to the Java Virtual Machine will perform structured locking, implementations of the Java Virtual Machine are permitted but not required to enforce both of the following two rules guaranteeing structured locking. Let *T* be a thread and *M* be a monitor. Then: 

1. The number of monitor entries performed by *T* on *M* during a method invocation must equal the number of monitor exits performed by *T* on *M* during the method invocation whether the method invocation completes normally or abruptly. 
2. At no point during a method invocation may the number of monitor exits performed by *T* on *M* since the method invocation exceed the number of monitor entries performed by *T* on *M* since the method invocation. 

Note that the monitor entry and exit automatically performed by the Java Virtual Machine when invoking a synchronized method are considered to occur during the calling method's invocation. 