#### **2.5.4 Method Area** 

The Java Virtual Machine has a *method area* that is shared among all Java Virtual Machine threads. The method area is analogous to the storage area for compiled code of a conventional language or analogous to the "text" segment in an operating system process. It stores per-class structures such as the run-time constant pool, field and method data, and the code for methods and constructors, including the special methods (ยง2.9) used in class and instance initialization and interface initialization. 

The method area is created on virtual machine start-up. Although the method area is logically part of the heap, simple implementations may choose not to either garbage collect or compact it. This specification does not mandate the location of the method area or the policies used to manage compiled code. The method area may be of a fixed size or may be expanded as required by the computation and may be contracted if a larger method area becomes unnecessary. The memory for the method area does not need to be contiguous. 

> A Java Virtual Machine implementation may provide the programmer or the user control over the initial size of the method area, as well as, in the case of a varying-size method area, control over the maximum and minimum method area size. 

The following exceptional condition is associated with the method area:

- If memory in the method area cannot be made available to satisfy an allocation 

  request, the Java Virtual Machine throws an OutOfMemoryError. 

