#### **2.8.2 Floating-Point Modes** 

Every method has a *floating-point mode*, which is either *FP-strict* or *not FP- strict*. The floating-point mode of a method is determined by the setting of the ACC_STRICT flag of the access_flags item of the method_info structure (ยง4.6) defining the method. A method for which this flag is set is FP-strict; otherwise, the method is not FP-strict. 

> Note that this mapping of the ACC_STRICT flag implies that methods in classes compiled by a compiler in JDK release 1.1 or earlier are effectively not FP-strict. 

We will refer to an operand stack as having a given floating-point mode when the method whose invocation created the frame containing the operand stack has that floating-point mode. Similarly, we will refer to a Java Virtual Machine instruction as having a given floating-point mode when the method containing that instruction has that floating-point mode. 

If a float-extended-exponent value set is supported (ยง2.3.2), values of type float on an operand stack that is not FP-strict may range over that value set except where prohibited by value set conversion (ยง2.8.3). If a double-extended-exponent value set is supported (ยง2.3.2), values of type double on an operand stack that is not FP-strict may range over that value set except where prohibited by value set conversion. 

In all other contexts, whether on the operand stack or elsewhere, and regardless of floating-point mode, floating-point values of type float and double may only range over the float value set and double value set, respectively. In particular, class and instance fields, array elements, local variables, and method parameters may only contain values drawn from the standard value sets. 

