#### 3.7 **Invoking Methods** 

The normal method invocation for a instance method dispatches on the run- time type of the object. (They are virtual, in C++ terms.) Such an invocation is implemented using the *invokevirtual* instruction, which takes as its argument an index to a run-time constant pool entry giving the internal form of the binary name of the class type of the object, the name of the method to invoke, and that method's descriptor (ยง4.3.3). To invoke the addTwo method, defined earlier as an instance method, we might write: 

```java
int add12and13() {
	return addTwo(12, 13);
}
```

This compiles to: 

```
Method int add12and13()
0 aload_0								// Push local variable 0 (this)					
1 bipush 12							// Push int constant 12
3 bipush 13							// Push int constant 13
5 invokevirtual #4 			// Method Example.addtwo(II)I
8 ireturn								// Return int on top of operand stack;
												 // it is the int result of addTwo()
```

The invocation is set up by first pushing a reference to the current instance, this, on to the operand stack. The method invocation's arguments, int values 12 and 13, are then pushed. When the frame for the addTwo method is created, the arguments passed to the method become the initial values of the new frame's local variables. That is, the reference for this and the two arguments, pushed onto the operand stack by the invoker, will become the initial values of local variables *0*, *1*, and *2* of the invoked method. 

Finally, addTwo is invoked. When it returns, its int return value is pushed onto the operand stack of the frame of the invoker, the add12and13 method. The return value is thus put in place to be immediately returned to the invoker of add12and13. 

The return from add12and13 is handled by the *ireturn* instruction of add12and13. The *ireturn* instruction takes the int value returned by addTwo, on the operand stack of the current frame, and pushes it onto the operand stack of the frame of the invoker. It then returns control to the invoker, making the invoker's frame current. The Java Virtual Machine provides distinct return instructions for many of its numeric and reference data types, as well as a *return* instruction for methods with no return value. The same set of return instructions is used for all varieties of method invocations. 

The operand of the *invokevirtual* instruction (in the example, the run-time constant pool index *#4*) is not the offset of the method in the class instance. The compiler does not know the internal layout of a class instance. Instead, it generates symbolic references to the methods of an instance, which are stored in the run-time constant pool. Those run-time constant pool items are resolved at run-time to determine the actual method location. The same is true for all other Java Virtual Machine instructions that access class instances. 

Invoking addTwoStatic, a class (static) variant of addTwo, is similar, as shown: 

```java
int add12and13() {
	return addTwoStatic(12, 13);
}
```

although a different Java Virtual Machine method invocation instruction is used: 

```
Method int add12and13()
0 bipush 12
2 bipush 13
4 invokestatic #3 // Method Example.addTwoStatic(II)I 
7 ireturn
```

Compiling an invocation of a class (static) method is very much like compiling an invocation of an instance method, except this is not passed by the invoker. The method arguments will thus be received beginning with local variable *0* (ยง3.6). The *invokestatic* instruction is always used to invoke class methods. 

The *invokespecial* instruction must be used to invoke instance initialization methods (ยง3.8). It is also used when invoking methods in the superclass (super) and when invoking private methods. For instance, given classes Near and Far declared as: 

```java
class Near {
	int it;
	public int getItNear() {
		return getIt();
	}
	private int getIt() {
		return it; 
	}
}

class Far extends Near {
	int getItFar() {
		return super.getItNear(); 
	}
}
```

the method Near.getItNear (which invokes a private method) becomes: 

```
Method int getItNear()
0 aload_0
1 invokespecial #5 // Method Near.getIt()I
4 ireturn
```

The method Far.getItFar (which invokes a superclass method) becomes: 

```
Method int getItFar()
0 aload_0
1 invokespecial #4 // Method Near.getItNear()I
4 ireturn
```

Note that methods called using the *invokespecial* instruction always pass this to the invoked method as its first argument. As usual, it is received in local variable *0*. 

To invoke the target of a method handle, a compiler must form a method descriptor that records the actual argument and return types. A compiler may not perform method invocation conversions on the arguments; instead, it must push them on the stack according to their own unconverted types. The compiler arranges for a reference to the method handle object to be pushed on the stack before the arguments, as usual. The compiler emits an *invokevirtual* instruction that references a descriptor which describes the argument and return types. By special arrangement with method resolution (ยง5.4.3.3), an *invokevirtual* instruction which invokes the invokeExact or invoke methods of java.lang.invoke.MethodHandle will always link, provided the method descriptor is syntactically well-formed and the types named in the descriptor can be resolved. 